---
layout: post
title: OSDC 2008 Earlybird registration closing this Friday
date: 2008-10-28
permalink: /blog/archives/2008-10-28-osdc-2008-earlybird-registration-closing-this-friday
---
In exactly five weeks this year's Open Source Developers' Conference starts. As one of the organising committee it would be remiss of me not to alert you to the fact that if you "register":http://www.osdc.com.au/2008/registration by this Friday you can take advantage of earlybird pricing.

h3. The Facts

31st October: Earlybird registration closing

2nd December: Google Hackathon
3rd - 5th December: Conference Program
3rd December: Conference Dinner

h3. Where

"SMC Conference and Function Centre":http://www.osdc.com.au/2008/location
66 Goulburn St
Sydney NSW 2000

h3. The Main Conference

The Open Source Developers' Conference 2008 is a conference run by open source developers, for developers and business people. This year we have talks covering Apache, Java, Ruby, Perl, PHP, Python, Testing and much more. Our keynote speakers this year are:

* Larry Wall, the creator of Perl
* Chris DiBona, Open Source Programs Manager for Google
* Anthony Baxter, Python Evangelist
* Pia Waugh, Consultant, Waugh Partners
* Andrew Tridgell, Founder, Samba Team

Speakers on Ruby topics include:

* Michael Koukoullis: "Story-based Web Development"
* Dr Nic Williams: "How to package your Ruby code for distribution and sharing"

Check out "the program":http://www.osdc.com.au/2008/papers for more information.

h3. Google Hackathon

The day before the main conference, there will be an optional event. The Google Hackathon will consist of 3 coding workshops during the day with attendance limited to a maximum of 100 people/workshop. To register for any of the workshops, you must have registered for the 3 day OSDC 2008 main conference.

h3. Our Sponsors

Naturally the organising committee is most grateful to our sponsors: Google, Corporate Express, Sun Microsystems, Strategic Data, Obsidian Consulting Group, IBM, Zacware/Freeway, ACS, Net Logistics, GROX, UTBox, Internode and Linux Magazine.
